---
title: Advanced Logging
layout: post
author: Adrian
description: How logging works with Sin.Net packages
categories: Sin.Net
tags: [Sin.Net, C#, NLog]
music-text: Gojira - Flying whales
music-href: https://youtu.be/_-XaaTqOICU
---

An advanced **and easy** logging functionality is an often underrated topic in software technologies. But you should have a good logging feature when an application runs in a commercial or even in a crucial environment.
I tend to say that **EVERY** software should have a comprehensive logging mechanism to ensure transparency of your system.

This blog post is about the usage of the **Sin.Net.Logging** library and how to use it in a productive environment and for unit testing the same time.

##### Requirements

Before you can use the functionality of **Sin.Net.Logging** you need any kind of .NET project and the NuGet packages
<ul class="ul-md">
  <li> <a target="_blank" href="https://www.nuget.org/packages/Sin.Net.Domain/">Sin.Net.Domain</a> and</li>
  <li><a target="_blank" href="https://www.nuget.org/packages/Sin.Net.Logging/">Sin.Net.Logging</a> included.</li>
</ul>

Just add them to your project in your preferred way via CLI or the package manger explorer in Visual Studio.
The logging in **Sin.Net** provides six levels. `Trace` is the weakest and `Fatal` the strongest level, like seen below.
These are based on the [NLog](https://nlog-project.org/) project that is also used as reference implementation.

<div class="mermaid hide-on-small-only">
graph LR
    A[Trace] --> B[Debug]
    B --> C[Info]
    C --> D[Warn]
    D --> E[Error]
    E --> F[Fatal]
</div>

<div class="mermaid hide-on-med-and-up">
graph TB
    A[Trace] --> B[Debug]
    B --> C[Info]
    C --> D[Warn]
    D --> E[Error]
    E --> F[Fatal]
</div>

##### Logging with Sin.Net.Logging

After your project setup is ready, you have to add one line of code **before** you are able to log something.
In your productive system this should be one the first statements in your `Program.cs`.
If you try to log something without the line shown below, there should nothing happen.

```c#
using Sin.Net.Domain.Persistence.Logging;
using Sin.Net.Logging;

public class Program
{
    public static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        Log.Inject(new NLogger());
        Log.Info("Logging runs fine");
    }
}
```

Here, an instance of a logger is injected into the static class `Log` that has to implement the `ILoggable` interface.
The static class is now using the functionality of this instance.
The **Sin.Net.Logging** provides two logger classes for you: the `NLogger` and the `TestLogger` class.
Both rely on the [NLog](https://nlog-project.org/) library and are preconfigured within the code so you needn't to define a config file.
Both logger classes are printing on the console.
The difference between them is that the `TestLogger` will **not** create a file but the `NLogger` class does.

It is <span class="attention">important to notice</span> that all static Log calls are not dependend on any logging implementation so you can exchange your logging library by simply changing the injected object.

##### Implementing a different Logger

You just need to implement the `ILoggable` interface from the **Sin.Net.Domain** assembly and fill its methods with your own behavior.
The static `Log` class will call the implemented methods with the same names anywhere you need it.

So with **Sin.Net** it becomes pretty lightweight to switch from one concrete logger to another without changing any line of productive code.
For example, I start my unit tests with the `TestLogger` and run my productive code with the `NLogger` class and get exactliy the logging that I need for each case.

For deeper insights what happens to your logger within the `Log` class, please take a look into the
<a target="_blank" href="https://github.com/sin-net/Sin.Net/blob/master/Sin.Net.Solution/Sin.Net.Domain/Persistence/Logging/Log.cs">source code</a>.

```c#
using Sin.Net.Domain.Persistence.Logging;

public class MyLogger : ILoggable
{
    public MyLogger()
    {
        Start();
    }

    public void Start()
    {
        // optional start routine
        // call in the constructor
    }

    public void Stop()
    {
        // optional shutdown routine
    }

    public void Trace(string msg) { }
    public void Debug(string msg) { }
    public void Info(string msg) { }
    public void Warn(string msg) { }
    public void Error(string msg) { }
    public void Fatal(Exception ex) { }
}
```

##### Conclusion

A good logging is not hard to implement, but it is not simple to make it easy for the programmer to use it.
The **Sin.Net** project provides a solution that is easy to use or to adapt with your own logging when you are not okay with the NLog dependency.

The built-in loggers in **Sin.Net.Logging** are not the most flexible ones, but in a further version it is likely to ensure that by using the NLog config files as alternative.
